---
layout: event
title: "A Digital Critical Edition for the Making and Knowing Project"
location: "Butler Studio"
people:
- Pamela Smith
participants:
- Jenny Boulboullé
- Grant Wythoff
- Phil Polefrone
- Aaron Plasek
- Sierra Eckert
- Dagmar Riedel
- Jeremy Stevens
- Dennis Yi Tenen
- Manan Ahmed
- Susanna Alles Torrent
type: encounter
prompt: "Using grad student lab notes, make a richly annotated, open access critical edition of an early modern 'book of secrets' containing technical recipes and working notes."
categories:
- events
- knowledge-design-studio
hour: 3pm
images:
 - p003r_BW.jpg
 - labnotes.jpg
 - manuscript.png
---

Pamela Smith, Seth Low Professor of History and Director of the [Center for
Science and Society](http://scienceandsociety.columbia.edu/) at Columbia will
present on her ongoing research with [The Making and Knowing Project: From the
Workshop to the Laboratory][11].

Historians have long acknowledged the foundational importance of craft
knowledge to the development of modern science. In recent years, historians of
science have investigated the relationship of craft practice to various
learned communities in early modern Europe, such as humanities scholars,
medical practitioners, (al)chemists, and advocates of the “new experimental
philosophy.” Simultaneously, historians of science, technology, material
culture, and book history have become increasingly interested in the genre of
early modern recipes, books of secrets, and how-to manuals that shed light on
a remarkable transition in European society, when craftspeople began writing
down their working procedures.

This project brings together a diverse range of humanities students and
scholars working alongside scientists in both a digital workspace and a
laboratory to reconstruct the technical procedures contained in one such
historical source, by an anonymous French-speaking practitioner who in about
1580 took the unusual step of setting down on paper his techniques for a
number of processes that we would now classify as part of the fine arts, of
craft, and of technology. One of the aims of this project is to produce an
open-access digital edition and English translation of this intriguing text.
The digital edition is only one dimension of this project, however, for the
process by which this critical edition will be produced is as important as its
product. Research for the edition will form an experiment in both pedagogy and
humanistic research. It will involve students working alongside academic and
museum-based historians of art and historians of science, in collaboration
with experienced makers, to reconstruct the technical recipes contained in the
manuscript. Their findings will be used to understand and annotate the digital
edition, and their experiences will foster the sharing of expertise across
disciplines as well as the engagement on the part of students with the
material culture of the past.

A quick proof-of-concept mock-up Making and Knowing materials can be found
here: <http://xpmethod.plaintext.in/making-knowing/>.

[11]: https://web.archive.org/web/20150508213005/http://scienceandsociety.columbia.edu/research-clusters/from-the-workshop-to-the-laboratory

