---
title: "Ed"
people:
- Alex Gil
type: template
published: true
snippet: 102
images:
- ed-screenshot.png
---

One of our most pressing and ever revolving needs as scholars is to pass on
our textual artifacts from one generation to another. The art of textual
editing, among other practices, has helped many cultures to remember and
interpret for centuries. Alas, that art is practiced and encouraged in its
highest form by a dwindling number of scholars. In a digital environment the
problem is compounded by the difficulties of the medium. While vast
repositories, and "e-publications" appear on the online scene yearly, very few
manifest a textual scholar's disciplined attention to detail. In contrast,
most textual scholars who have made the leap to a rigorous digital practice
have focused on markup, relying on technical teams to deploy and maintain
their work. This makes your average scholarly digital edition a very costly,
and therefore limited affair. We hope that Ed can help would-be and veteran
textual scholars make it easier to deploy their own editions in a lasting way.

As we see it, a minimal edition is one that reduces elements of a digital
edition to its bare minimum components. Out of-the-box, this theme can help
you build a simple reading edition, or a traditional scholarly edition with
footnotes and a bibliography. In our estimate, these are the two most
immediately useful type of editions for editors and readers. An edition
produced with Ed is lightweight and durable. Our hope is that our approach can
help beginners or veterans deploy beautiful editions with less effort, that it
can help us [teach a 'full
stack'](https://github.com/susannalles/MinimalEditions) in one academic
semester, allow us to care for our projects at less cost, and perhaps allow us
to generate high-quality editions on github.io in large quantities based on
the [git-lit](http://jonreeve.com/2015/09/introducing-git-lit/) model by
Jonathan Reeve.

[Ed](http://elotroalex.github.io/ed/) is a [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/)
theme designed for textual editors based on [minimal computing
principles](http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/). In other words, the technology
is easier to learn or teach and can produce beautifully rendered scholarly or
reading editions of texts. The resulting edition consists of static pages
whose rate of decay is substantially lower than database-driven systems. As an
added bonus, these static pages require less bandwidth.

Ed is built on top of [Lanyon](https://github.com/poole/lanyon), a Jekyll
theme based on [Poole](http://getpoole.com), "the Jekyll butler," both created
by [Mark Otto](https://github.com/mdo) and distributed with an MIT license.
Thanks to Mark Otto for his helpful streamlining.

