---
title: "Wax"
people:
  - Marii Nyr√∂p
type: tools
published: true
github: minicomp/wax_tasks
---

__Minicomp/Wax__ is a heterogeneous collection of experiments, strategies, and
functional components for adapting [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com) for minimal
exhibition sites. It centers on a Jekyll theme
([`wax_theme`](https://github.com/minicomp/wax/)) and set of Rake tasks
([`wax_tasks`](https://github.com/minicomp/wax_tasks/)) that together enable
digital humanists to create impactful sites with IIIF viewers, elastic search,
and complex metadata with very little technical overhead.

It is a sister project to [Minicomp/Ed](https://github.com/minicomp/ed):
Jekyll for Minimal Scholarly Editions.

As a set of practices and priorities, **minimal computing** has proven well
suited to the needs of digital humanities projects and scholars. Specifically,
its tenets of [Minimal
Dependencies](http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/03/tldr#minimal-dependencies),
[Minimal
Maintenance](http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/03/tldr#minimal-maintenance)
and [Minimal
Presence](http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/03/tldr#minimal-presence)
help offset DH's frequent scarcity of resources, and its emphases on [Maximum
Access](http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/03/tldr#maximum-access),
[Minimal
Consumption](http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/03/tldr#minimal-use)
and [Minimal
Obsolescence](http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/03/tldr#minimal-obsolescence)
complement and strengthen the core of critical digital humanities work.

In line with the goals of minimal computing, **Minicomp/Wax** is a set of
experiments, strategies, and functional components for adapting
[Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com) (a modular, minimal static site generator) to
evolve alongside emergent digital humanities scholarship.

Though the objectives of Wax are ongoing, its success will be tied to the
development of key workflows for producing **digital exhibitions**. These
exhibitions, though minimal, will still include many of the components
expected of database-powered platforms like WordPress, Scalar, and Omeka. The
components themselves will be **discrete**, **lightweight**,
**interoperable**, and **easy to use**, creating an expansive framework of
Jekyll tooling that enables scholars to dynamically assemble what they need
and drop what they don't.

Need a site with dynamic search but can't commit to maintaining a database?
Need a simple blog but are worried about vulnerabilities in WordPress? Want to
make a custom [IIIF](http://iiif.io/) image exhibition or a
[D3js](https://d3js.org/) data visualization from student-generated CSVs? Need
to host thousands of static pages, but don't have a budget for server space?
These are just a few of the directions currently giving shape to Wax.

__[wax](https://github.com/minicomp/wax/)__ is a (soon-to-be) gem-packaged
Jekyll theme. <br><br><a
href="https://gemnasium.com/github.com/mnyrop/wax"><img
src="https://gemnasium.com/badges/github.com/mnyrop/wax.svg"/></a> <a
href="https://travis-ci.org/minicomp/wax"><img
src="https://travis-ci.org/minicomp/wax.svg"/></a>

__[wax_tasks](https://github.com/minicomp/wax_tasks/)__ is gem-packaged set of
Rake tasks. <a href="https://badge.fury.io/rb/wax_tasks"><br><br><img
src="https://badge.fury.io/rb/wax_tasks.svg"/></a> <a
href="https://gemnasium.com/github.com/mnyrop/wax_tasks"><img
src="https://gemnasium.com/badges/github.com/mnyrop/wax_tasks.svg"/></a> <a
href="https://travis-ci.org/mnyrop/wax_tasks"><img
src="https://travis-ci.org/mnyrop/wax_tasks.svg"/></a>
