---
title: "Mapping Medieval Pasts"
people:
- Manan Ahmed
type: map
published: true
image: delhi.png
images:
- delhi2.jpg
---

One of my central concerns has been to think about medieval and early modern
conceptions of space---place, landscape, and affective resonances around the
built environment. I am dissatisfied with the established practice of scanning
maps, geotagging them to known geography, and attaching text layers.

### Earlier

An early effort took eighteenth- and nineteenth-century maps of Delhi and
rendered them according to spatial descriptions in textual accounts of the
city. We considered creating and structuring an archive of Delhi that combined
maps, historical texts, and rich text<!--??? prp--> along with scholarly
commentary and annotations. Our sources included Persian histories of Delhi,
such as the *Salih-e Amal* by Kanbo, the *Ma’asir ul Umara*, and travel
accounts such as the memoirs of Bernier, Tavernier, and Dargah Quli Khan. We
added detailed descriptions of Delhi by Mirza Sangin Beg, Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan
and Bashir ud Din Ahmad. All of this information was encoded on Mughal maps of
Shahjahanabad and earlier maps of the city commissioned by British imperial
administrations.

While this added a much needed spatiality to modern and early modern texts, the
question of the medieval understanding of space remained for me. I began to
think of space and place as nodes of an organizational chart.

### Then

My next effort was to represent places in a ninth-century conquest
narrative---al-Baladhuri's *Kitāb Futuh al-Buldān*---as an [organizational
chart](http://www.fastcodesign.com/3026334/this-beautiful-19th-century-org-chart-puts-your-companys-to-shame),
jettisoning the artificiality of the cartographic imagination. I was interested
in translating circles, lines, nodes, and distances from a center into
campaigns, regions, areas, cities, and battles. The intent was to make an
**Argumentative Map** that spatialized the narrative without flattening it.
I attempted to encode into numerical data aesthetic, political, social,
cultural information in the narrative. My goal was to get closer to seeing
*how* medieval and early modern representations of space can be visualized, but
also to work towards making *argumentative* DH projects---projects that go
beyond scan and post.

### Later

I taught a graduate seminar on
[Borderlands](https://github.com/mananahmed/syllabi/blob/master/borderlands.md)
in the spring of 2015. As part of the seminar, I also took on the exercise of
constructing a map. I worked closely with Emily Fuhrman and Jeremiah
Trinidad-Christensen. For the exercise, we picked a tenth century
geography---Ibn KHurdādhbih's *Kitāb Masālik wa Mamālik*---and plotted the
journey into Sind's cities from Iran. For constructing the map, we took our
cue from James C. Scott's *The Art of Not Being Governed* where he produces a
map of walking-time through mountainous territories. The resulting map is:
[Delivering Posts by Foot in Medieval North
India](http://emilyfuhrman.co/interactive/F2015002/). The GIS data was
collected from various primary sources and the visualization was done using
Leaflet.js. 

### Next

In 2015-16, I am interested in teaming up with other medievalists and mappers
to take on a bigger text---Abu'l Fazl's *Ain-i Akbāri*---to make an
administrative map of Mughal India in the sixteenth century.
