---
title: Plain Text
type: book
people:
- Dennis Yi Tenen
sparkle: plain-text-prog.txt
image: control-2.png
updates:

- date: 2017-09-01
  text: "\"*Plain Text* adds to the impressive work of such computationally savvy theorists \
         as Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Alexander Galloway, Alan Liu, Rita Raley, and others \ 
         to make a clear, forceful case for computational poetics as a necessary literary \
         practice in the digital age,\" Katherine Hayles writes for [*Critical \
         Inquiry*](https://web.archive.org/web/20190322221432/https://criticalinquiry.uchicago.edu/n._katherine_hayles_reviews_plain_text)."
  type: press

- date: 2017-10-01
  text: "\"Plain Text is a vibrant call to rethink the two culture debate \
        in broad cultural and political terms,\" Jan Baetens writes for \
        [*Leonardo*](https://web.archive.org/web/20171126230920/https://www.leonardo.info/review/2017/10/review-of-plain-text-the-poetics-of-computation)."
  type: press

- date: 2017-11-01
  text: "James Edward Draney calls the work \"an important and engaging book \
        ... which provides a lucid and legible map to our often vertiginous \
        computational climate\" in [*Los Angeles Review of Books*](https://web.archive.org/web/20171126230526/https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/computation-de-texte/)."
  type: press

- date: 2018-07-01
  text: "\"Necessary\" and \"convincing\" Maisie Ridgway writes for \
        [*Textual Practice*](https://web.archive.org/web/20190322223023/https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0950236X.2018.1496662?journalCode=rtpr20)."
  type: press

- date: 2016-06-01
  text: "Manuscript accepted at Stanford University Press."
  type: publication

---

While I write these introductory remarks, a ceiling-mounted smoke detector in
my kitchen emits a loud noise every three minutes or so. A pleasant female
voice announces also "low battery." This is, I learn, a precaution stipulated
by US National Fire Alarm Code 72-108 11.6.6 (2013). The clause requiring a
"distinct audible signal before the battery is incapable of operating" is
encoded into the device. The smoke detector literally embodies that piece of
legislation in its circuitry. We thus obtain a condition where two meanings of
code---as governance and machine instruction---coincide. Code equals code.

I am at home, but I also receive a notification of the alarm on my mobile
phone. Along with monitoring apps that help make my home "smarter," the phone
contains most of my library. I often pick it up to read a book. The phrase
"reading a book," however, obscures a number of metaphors for a series of odd
actions.  The "book" is a small, thin black rectangle: three inches wide, five
inches tall, and barely a few millimeters thick. A slab of polished glass
covers the front of the device, where the tiny eyes of a camera and a light
sensor also protrude. At the back, made of smooth soft plastic, we find
another, larger camera. At the foot of the device, a grid of small
perforations indicates breathing room for a speaker and several microphones.
To "open" a book I touch the glass. The machine recognizes my fingerprint. I
then tap and poke at the surface until I find a small image that represents
both my library and book store, where I can "buy" and "borrow" books. Buying
or borrowing books does not, however, involve the possession of physical
objects. Rather, I agree to a license that grants limited access to data,
which the software then assembles into something resembling a book on screen.
I tap again to begin reading. The screen dims to match room ambiance as it
fills up with words. A passage on the first page appears underlined: other
readers in my social circle must have found it notable. I swipe across the
glass surface to turn a "page." The device emits a muffled rustle to reinforce
the pretense of manipulating paper. The image curls ever so slightly as
another "page" slides into view. My tiny library metaphor contains hundreds of
such page metaphors.

Despite appearances, the electronic metaphor-making device on my desk has more
in common with smoke detectors than it does with several paper volumes
scattered on my desk. The electronic book and smoke alarm contain printed
circuit boards, capacitors, and resistors. Both draw electric current. Both
require firmware updates and both are governed by codes, political and
computational. Smoke alarms and mobile phones connect to the internet. They
communicate with distant data centers and with each other. Yet, I continue to
"read" these devices as if they were familiar, immutable, and passive objects:
just books. I think of them as intimate artifacts---friends even---wholly
known to me, comforting, and warm. The electronic book is none of those
things. Besides prose, it keeps my memories, pictures, words, sounds, and
thoughts. It records my reading, sleeping, and consumption habits. It tries to
sell me things, showing me advertisements for cars, jewelry, and pills. It
comes with a manual and terms of service. It is my confidant, my dealer, my
spy.
*Plain Text* concerns the nature of digital inscription---the material trace
that gives rise to textual phenomena, and, more broadly, to all cultural
artifacts in which computers mediate. We find ourselves today in an
unprecedented, since the Middle Ages, position of selective *asemiosis*: the
loss of signification. Many contemporary texts---like poems inscribed into
bacteria and encrypted software---exist simply beyond the reach of human
senses.[^ln-dna] Other forms of writing are illegible by design, in ways that
prevent access or comprehension. Increasingly, we write not in the sense of
making marks on paper but in simulation. Key presses leave lasting traces in
computer memory, which then appear on screen redoubled and ephemeral. On disk,
marks endure in a form legible only to those who possess the specialized tools
and training necessary to decipher them.

I appeal to the idea of "plain text" in the title of this book to signal an
affinity with a particular mode of computational meaning-making. Plain text
identifies a file format and frame of mind. As file format, it contains
nothing but a "pure sequence of character codes." Plain text stands in
opposition to "fancy text," "text representation consisting of plain text plus
added information."[^1] In the tradition of American textual criticism, "plain
text" alludes to an editorial method of text transcription which is both
"faithful to the text of its source" and is "easier to read than the original
document."[^2] Combining these two traditions, I mean to build a case for a
kind of a systematic minimalism when it comes to our use of computers---a
minimalism that privileges access to source materials, ensuring legibility and
comprehension. I do so in contrast with other available modes of
human-computer interaction, which instead maximize system-centric ideals like
efficiency, speed, performance, or security.

The title further identifies an interpretive stance one can assume in relation
to the making and the unmaking of literary artifacts. Besides visible content,
all contemporary documents carry with them a layer of hidden information.
Originally used for typesetting, that layer affects more than innocuous
document attributes like "font size" or "line spacing." Increasingly, devices
that mediate literary activity also embody governing structures. For example,
the Digital Millennium Copyright act, passed in the United States in 1996,
goes beyond written injunction to require in some cases the management of
digital rights (DRM) at the level of hardware. An electronic book governed by
DRM may subsequently prevent the reader from copying or sharing stored
content, even for the purposes of academic study.[^ln-dmca] In some
situations, the device may collect reader activity.

Machine instruction thus embodies new forms of technological control. To speak
truth to power---to retain a civic potential for critique---we must therefore
perceive the mechanisms of its codification. Critical theory cannot otherwise
endure apart from material contexts of textual production, which today emanate
from the fields of computer science and software engineering. Conversely, a
tighter coupling with the critical tradition can reveal technology's often
occluded political implications. To create a novel algorithm that predicts
crime by analyzing one's reading habits, for example, is also to invite the
dystopian possibility of thought policing, unless, that is, such algorithms
remain legible, in public view, and under continual counter-scrutiny. A
vibrant discursive practice of textual exegesis is crucial for the
preservation of whatever ideals that demand a literate populace.

[^ln-dna]: See Bök, “The Xenotext Works.” and Bök, The Xenotext: “I have been striving to write a short verse about language and genetics, whereupon I use a ‘chemical alphabet’ to translate this poem into a sequence of DNA for subsequent implantation into the genome of a bacterium (in this case, a microbe called Deinococcus radiodurans—an extremophile, capable of surviving, without mutation, in even the most hostile milieus, including the vacuum of outer space).”

[^ln-dmca]: See Ku, “Critique of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act’s Exception on Encryption Research.”; Ginsburg, “Legal Protection of Technological Measures Protecting Works of Authorship.”; and Fry, “Circumventing Access Controls Under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act.”

[^1]: Unicode Consortium, “The Unicode Standard,” 9–10.

[^2]: Cook, “Some Considerations in the Concept of Pre-Copy-Text.”
