---
title: "Epigraphing the 19th Century"
people:
- Aaron Plasek
type: experiment
published: true
snippet: 123
updates:
- date: 2015-09-01
  text: "Collected 7,689 epigraphs from 3,000 XML-encoded 19th-century US
novels from the Early American Fiction and [Wright American
Fiction](https://github.com/iulibdcs/tei_text) archives."
- date: 2015-09-01
  text: "Newest version of [XML
scraper](https://github.com/aaronplasek/19th_C._novel_scraper) collects a
range of bibliographic and epigraphic information, and identifies novels that
are potentially mistagged."
edited:
- by: Phillip R. Polefrone
  date: 2016-08-24
---

Frequently ignored and occasionally made up, the epigraph is a textual genre
defined both by its physical placement on the page and by the absence of the
textual object being signposted. An epigraph attribution situates the text it
prefaces within a larger constellation of texts and authors, and in this
manner has an indexical function rather similar to scanning the spines of
books on a shelf, flipping through a card catalog, or examining a record in a
digital relational database. The affordances of citation networks cannot
replace other critical methods, but a comparative approach to the different
kinds of citation practices made visible by different networks of attribution
provides an opportunity to reconsider how shared concepts that constitute a
(disciplinary) field are produced, transmitted, and inhibited through our
media-centric notions of consensus. From working with many nineteenth-century
novels, we know that the Bible and Shakespeare were frequently used as novel
epigraphs, but little is known about who else was being quoted. Nor is
anything known about the larger patterns of affiliation and citation assembled
by these texts.

### Calls for Participation

* **Finding untagged epigraphs in TEI-XML Files**
    While epigraphs have been tagged in XML by a human transcriber, there are
certain novels in the digitized collection (such as James Fenimore Cooper's
_Wyandotte_) that are mistagged.<sup>1,2</sup> Want some experience editing
TEI? Have an algorithmic approach for tagging "rogue" epigraphs? Drop us a
line!

* **Name Disambiguation**
    There is little standardization of how names were spelled in
nineteenth-century texts. (To wit, there are at least eight spellings of
"Shakespeare.") Epigraph attribution formats are similarly unpredictable:
separating titles (when present) from author names (when present) is a
difficult algorithmic problem. Want to try out a clever "identity resolution"
algorithm on a new data set? Our epigraph collection will be made open access
shortly.

### Selected Talks / Publications / Press

<sup>1</sup> Aaron Plasek and Rob Koehler. "Mediating Genres of Prestige, Credit, and
   Authority: The Epigraph and the Citation." Conference paper. Digital
Crucible: Arts, Humanities, & Computation. Leslie Center for the Humanities &
Neukom Institute for Computational Science. Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH. 7
October 2014.

<sup>2</sup> Aaron Plasek. “Fail Better: On Algorithmic ‘Transparency’ as
Critical Procedure.” *Media Res* 1: DH Lightning Talks. CUNY Graduate School,
New York, NY. 8 May 2015.
