---
title: Land Before Time II
image: land-1.jpg
images: 
- land-2.png
- land-3.png
type: performance
people:
- Gabrielle DaCosta
- Sam Yulsman
published: true
---


“The Land Before Time II” is a solo performance piece incorporating dance,
electronic sound, and text. The dancer (Justin Cabrillos) wears a jacket onto
which speakers are attached. The speakers emit sound which Cabrillos directs
through his movement. These sounds include a combination of processed field
recordings of environmental sounds, and text with varied sonic valances. Field
recordings evoke the physical landscape of a lonely, post-apocalyptic
future-scene; in which natural and digital forces are mutually
interpenetrating. Texts, complementarily, use empathically-spoken narratives
in both human and computer-voices to establish an eerie parity between
“natural” and “digital” affect. Texts include, for example, improvised and
rehearsed human speech (excerpts from interviews and pre-written dialogues
about significant personal memories), computer-processed sounds (a ReadSpeaker
robot reads passages from E.M. Forster’s apocalyptic novella, “The Machine
Stops”), and other electronically-modified voice parts. Texts and field
recordings are manipulated by the writer (Gabrielle DaCosta) and the composer
(Sam Yulsman), respectively, each acting with improvisatory agency and
relative autonomy. Each aspect of the piece colludes to blur and interrogate
the line between human and machine speech, emotion, and affect in a
post-internet future.
 
The guiding preoccupation that animates this project is the question of
machine consciousness and an imagining of its expression in a post-human
world. Cabrillos plays the role of computer-machine, drifting through an
abandoned landscape. Floating, he encounters what humans have left
behind—namely, what we are calling “affect detritus”; scattered intimate
thoughts, feelings, and memories. The computer/device/robot appears to
manipulate, archive, and channel the emotion-objects he encounters, yet it is
difficult to tell whether his relationship to them is motivated or
indifferent. In this sense, he might resemble philosopher Manuel DeLanda’s
“robot historian,” whose interest in human activity is ancillary to the
assembling of a robot genealogy.[^1] The “air” in this future scene, is
simultaneously “the cloud,” i.e. both a storing and accessing system and a
notion that metaphorizes the internet. In creating deliberate ambiguity
between “real” and “simulated” orders—the “air” versus the “cloud”—in this
piece, we seek to reflect upon the ways in which, in our current world, the
boundaries between the two are perhaps also slipping and eroding.

How will human notions of consciousness have to be expanded to take seriously
a possible phenomenology of machines? Via DeLanda, we encounter Gilles
Deleuze’s notion of the “machinic phylum” as the principle of
self-organization governing organic and inorganic behavior; including “all
processes in which a group of previously disconnected elements suddenly
reaches a critical point at which they begin to ‘cooperate’ to form a higher
level entity.”[^2]  The notion of “robot consciousness,” as DeLanda makes clear,
would perhaps be a product of such spontaneous self-organization. Furthermore,
construed in terms of the “machinic phylum,” the sentient robot would relate
to the human in terms of genealogical, evolutionary succession. Through the
labor of humans, robots have been able to increase their own capacity for
self-replication. By assembling varied textual and artistic mediums—text,
dance, speech—in an improvisatory manner, we seek to formally reproduce and
explore the stakes of, and conditions through which, cooperation and
individuation, chaos and order, and a sense of the “machinic phylum” come into
view.

[^1]:  Manuel DeLanda, *War in the Age of Intelligent Machines* (New York: Urzone Inc, 1991), 3.

[^2]: DeLanda, 6; Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, *A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia*, Trans. Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987).










