---
title: "In the Same Boats: Toward an Intellectual Cartography of the Afro-Atlantic"
location: "Butler Studio (208b), Columbia University"
type: workshop
prompt: "This work of multimodal scholarship consists of a series of
interactive maps that trace the movement of seminal intellectuals of Africa,
the Caribbean and the wider Americas throughout the Atlantic world. The
objective of this project is to chart the extent to which Caribbean,
US-American, Latino, European, and African cultural actors have been in both
punctual and sustained conversation with one another: attending the same
conferences, publishing with the same journals and presses, active in the same
political groups, elbow-to-elbow in the same Parisian cafés and on the same
planes---literally and metaphorically in the same boats---as they circulate
throughout the diverse spaces of the Americas, Africa, and Europe. By
rendering visually the points of spatio-temporal and textual intersection
among these figures, In the Same Boats will provide a rich, open-access
platform from which to explore the emergence, so often overlapping, of key
black Atlantic literary, cultural and political constructs."
categories: events
image:
 - carib-digital-iii.jpg
hour: 4-6pm

---

One of the greatest challenges for postcolonial scholars of Africa and its
diasporas is that of thoroughly accounting for the historical and theoretical
overlaps among intellectuals in the various linguo-national groupings in these
regions. Despite the oft-expressed aim of transcending borders, the study of
Global South intellectual production has been stubbornly balkanized, its
limits and contours largely determined by the elsewheres of Empire. Scholars
often find themselves in the difficult position of negotiating nation-language
frontiers that are the persistent legacies of colonialism, and pushing against
the implicitly Euro-centric foundations of contemporary university training.
While these phenomena are being challenged increasingly by interventions from
various individual scholars, the Afro-Atlantic’s partitioning within the
academy into Anglophone, Francophone, Hispanophone, and Lusophone spaces
persists, and is very much at odds with its shared socio-cultural and
historical realities.

In the Same Boats is an ambitious effort to counter the monolingualism and
attendant border-drawing that too often keep Caribbeanist, Latin-Americanist,
Africanist, and Afro-Americanist scholars from engaging in transnational and
transcolonial dialogue. The project has been conceived, in its most fully
realized form, as an ongoing collaborative venture – an invitation of sorts
that will provide scholars with the opportunity both to participate in the
development of a unique platform and to imagine research projects and
pedagogical initiatives that cross the geo-political borders separating the
various nations of Africa and the Americas. Specifically, the project makes
use of a customized content management system and embedded map- and
timeline-making tool to generate multiple individual maps produced on a common
template by specialists of the different linguistic regions of the
Afro-Atlantic world. These individually generated maps (of which particular
nodal points will function as portals leading to archival and critical
content) can be layered and combined, thereby charting an increasingly
comprehensive physical and conceptual cartography. The result will be a
dramatic visual representation of the rhizomatic trajectories that undergird
Afro-Atlantic intellectual contributions over time and across space.

Join us on Thursday, 1 December, 4-6PM  at the Studio@Butler for an
information session and workshop. We will lay out the back-end of the project
and outline the necessary steps toward placing a given
writer-artist-historian-anthropologist-political-figure on the map. And bring
your data!

RSVP requested but not required: kglover@barnard.edu
