---
title: "Digital Amati: Structure and Interpretation of Classical String
Instruments"
location: "Butler Studio (208b)"
type: lecture
prompt: "Harry Mairson, professor of computer science, Brandeis University,
and amateur violoncello maker, has conducted research on type systems in
programming languages and their relation to problems in logic and complexity
theory. In this lecture, he introduces the Digital Amati Project which
explores the structure, interpretation, and making of stringed instruments,
and how modern software can be used to represent historical practices of
instrument design. The lecture discusses digital humanities tools, and the
creative work done with them, and will be of interest to historians,
musicologists, practitioners of digital humanities, and makers."
categories:
- events
hour: 2-3pm
images:
- amati.png
---

Digital Amati Project:

Andrea Amati (1505-77) of Cremona is recognized as having made the world’s
first violin.  The goal of the Digital Amati Project is to advance
understanding of fundamental geometric structures in the design of classical
stringed instruments and their historical context. The project brings to light
computational aspects of violin building, using a new programming language
vernacular that describes traditional methods of design. These digital tools
reveal historical methodology, making violin family instruments comparable in
a new way, and offering insight into the unknown, intangible heritage of this
material culture—namely, through its design and construction principles, an
approach called “computational art history”. The project represents canonical
ideas about design in a Euclidean programming language idiom, for people to
read and machines to execute.

Event organized by Columbia's Center for Science and Society and co-sponsored
by History in Action, an initiative of the Columbia Department of History. For
more information, please visit:
[historyinaction.columbia.edu](http://historyinaction.columbia.edu).
