---
title: "The Marriage of Philology and Media: Two 1960's Media Archeologies, w/ Jeffrey Schnapp (Harvard University)"
location: "TBD"
type: lecture
prompt: "Jeffrey Schnapp is the founder/faculty director of metaLAB (at) Harvard and faculty co-director of the Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society. At Harvard, he serves as Professor of Romance Literatures and Comparative Literature in the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, is on the teaching faculty in the Department of Architecture at Harvard’s Graduate School of Design, and is affiliated with the Critical Media Practice program in Visual and Environmental Studies."
categories:
- events
hour: 2-3pm
images:
---

Originally trained as a medievalist, his recent books concern the modern and
contemporary epochs. They include The Electric Information Age Book
([Princeton Architectural Press 2012]); an anthology of essays on 20th century
Italian art, literature, design, and architecture entitled Modernitalia (Peter
Lang 2012); The Library Beyond the Book (Harvard University Press 2014), a
publication co-authored with Matthew Battles that explores future scenarios
for libraries in the digital age; Digital Humanities (Egea 2015), an essay on
cultural heritage management issues recently published in Italian in the Meet
the Media Guru series; and Blueprint for Counter Education — Expanded Reprint,
a reprint edition of Maurice Stein and Larry Miller’s 1970 work of radical
pedagogy. Forthcoming in early 2017 in both English and Italian with Rizzoli
International is FuturPiaggio. Six Italian Lessons on Mobility and Modern
Life. He is the editor of the metaLABprojects series with Harvard University
Press. Among his current writing projects is a panoramic study of the
artist-designer Bruno Munari, entitled Bruno Munari, A to Z (Phaidon). (Other
current or future projects are described under the In Progress tab of this
website).

His pioneering work in the domains of media, design, digital arts and
humanities, and curatorial practice includes collaborations with the Triennale
di Milano, the Cantor Center for the Visual Arts, the Wolfsonian-FIU, and the
Canadian Center for Architecture. His collaborative Trento Tunnels project—a
6000 sq. meter pair of highway tunnels in Northern Italy repurposed as a
history museum—was featured in the Italian pavilion of the 2010 Venice
Biennale of Architecture and at the MAXXI in Rome in RE-CYCLE. Strategie per
la casa la città e il pianeta (fall-winter 2011). Panorama of the Cold War,
carried out with Elisabetta Terragni (Studio Terragni Architetti) and Daniele
Ledda (XY comm), was exhibited in the Albanian Pavilion of the 2012 Venice
Biennale of Architecture and in Erasmus Effect – Architetti italiani
all’estero / Italian Architects Abroad at the MAXXI (Dec. 2013-April 2014). He
also served as chief consulting curator for BZ ’18-’45, a documentation center
built under Marcello Piacentini’s Monument to Victory in Bolzano/Bozen open to
the public since July 2014. BZ ’18-’45 was awarded Honorable Mention in the
2016 Museum of the Year competition by the European Museum Forum.

Event sponsored by the [Program in World
Philology](http://heymancenter.org/events/type/philology/) in association with
the Heyman Center for the Humanities at Columbia University.

> The Program in World Philology (PWP) aims to unite Columbia scholars across
departments and schools around the discipline-based study of texts. Philology,
defined over the course of its history as everything from text criticism to
“slow reading” to “all erudition in language,” is at base the discipline of
making sense of texts. Under this description philology is almost as old as
the production of written texts themselves. Over time it has proven to be as
central to knowledge as mathematics or philosophy, and its methods, like
theirs, have similarly been adopted in other disciplines.

For more information visit
[http://heymancenter.org/events/digital-philology/](http://heymancenter.org/events/digital-philology/).
