---
title: "Decolonizing Data Regimes"
location: Butler Studio 208b
type: talk
categories: events
hour: 4pm-5pm
prompt: "In this age of datafication, the quantification of human bodies, behaviors, and interactions
has raised myriad concerns about ethics and privacy. My talk takes a media archaeological
approach to sift through those prehistories which have shaped our contemporary digital
landscape. Specifically, I historicize trends toward datafication in the context of colonial
communication networks in the Global South. The data regimes we see today are premised upon a
colonial geography and a colonial rhetoric of technomodernity, and to decolonize digital
platforms we must take a long historical view on data ethics grounded in the Global South. My
talk articulates some of these possibilities for postcolonial data interventions for digital
infrastructures."

---

Dr. Dhanashree Thorat is a postdoctoral researcher in Digital Humanities at the Institute for
Digital Research in the Humanities, University of Kansas. Her research is situated at the
intersection of Asian American Studies, Postcolonial Studies, and Digital Humanities. Broadly,
she examines how colonial and racial ideologies shape the technological imagination,
specifically in technical infrastructures, platforms, and policies. Her current work focuses on
how Muslims use hashtag activism to intervene in public conversations about their racialized
bodies. Dhanashree is a founding Executive Council member of the Center for Digital Humanities,
Pune in India. She serves as the lead organizer for a biennial winter school on Digital
Humanities, and advises the center on digital archival projects and DH curriculum development.
She has also served as the co-convenor of the Digital Humanities Working Group at UF, and the
Digital Project Manager for the funded project, “Holistic Supports for the UF Digital
Collections (UFDC) and Digital Scholarship.” This fall, she will be joining the English
department at Mississippi State as an Assistant Professor in Multi-Ethnic U.S. Literature in
the fall.


