---
title: "The Climate Dynamics group is hiring a postdoctoral scholar"
location: "UC Santa Cruz"
type: opportunity 
images

prompt: "The Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) invites applications for a Postdoctoral Scholar in Climate Dynamics, under the direction of Professor Nicole Feldl. The postdoctoral scholar will conduct theoretical and computational studies of the changing global climate and atmospheric circulation. Research will investigate the relationship among circulation, clouds, and the hydrologic cycle across a range of time scales with a preferred focus on tropical and/or midlatitude dynamics. Project specifics will depend on the skills and interests of the successful applicant and may include such topics as the Hadley circulation, Intertropical Convergence Zone, and storm tracks."

categories: events
published: true

updates:

- date: 2020-09-01
  text: "Recruitment period opens"

---

A strong foundational background in atmospheric science is required, with expertise in large-scale atmospheric or climate dynamics. Applicants with computational fluency in global climate models, such as the Community Earth System Model or the Isca idealized modeling framework, and experience analyzing large datasets in high-performance computing environments are strongly encouraged to apply. Responsibilities will include designing, running, and analyzing numerical experiments; developing conceptual models and theories to improve process-level understanding; leading hypothesis-driven publications; and presenting findings at conferences and seminars.

The Earth and Planetary Sciences Department at UC Santa Cruz is a highly interdisciplinary environment comprising ~25 faculty with expertise across many components of the Earth System, including atmospheric physics, land surface processes, climate dynamics, terrestrial and marine biogeochemical cycles, ice sheets, and planetary atmospheres. UC Santa Cruz is a world-leading public research university that sits on two thousand acres of redwood-forested hills overlooking the Pacific Ocean and Monterey Bay with one of the most visually spectacular settings in higher education. The University of California is known for offering competitive retirement savings, health and family benefits, and has a strong institutional commitment to inclusive excellence and diversity.

Full consideration will be given to applications completed by November 15, 2020. Applications received after this date will be considered only if the position has not been filled.

See the [official posting](https://recruit.ucsc.edu/JPF00927) for application requirements.
 
